When my son Patrick
was around three or four years old,
I came regularly into his playroom,
and he was playing
with these blocks with letters.
I wanted him to learn to read eventually,
and one day he said,
“Pa.”
And I said, “Pa.”
And he said, “Pa?”
And then he said, “Pa-pa.”
(French) Yes!
Yes!
And then something wondrous happened.
He picked up the blocks again and said,
"Pa! Patrick."
Eureka!
His eurekas were feeding
my scientific eurekas.
His doors, our doors were opening
to expanded capabilities,
expanded agency and joy.
Today I'm going to be using
this symbol for human capabilities
and the expanding threads from there
for human agency,
which give us human joy.
Can you imagine a world without human joy?
I really wouldn't want that.
So I'm going to tell you also
about AI capabilities and AI agency,
so that we can avoid a future
where human joy is gone.
My name is Yoshua Bengio.
I'm a computer scientist.
My research has been foundational
to the development of AI
as we know it today.
My colleagues and I
earned top prizes in our field,
people call me a godfather of AI.
I'm not sure how I feel about that name,
but I do feel a responsibility
to talk to you about the potentially
catastrophic risks of AI.
When I raise these concerns,
people have these responses.
And I understand.
I used to have the same thoughts.
How can this hurt us
any more than this, right?
But recent scientific
findings challenge those assumptions,
and I want to tell you about it.
To really understand
where we might be going,
we have to look back
where we started from.
About 15 or 20 years ago with my students,
we were developing
the early days of deep learning,
and our systems were barely able
to recognize handwritten characters.
But then a few years later,
they were able to recognize
objects in images.
And a couple more years,
they were able to translate
across all the major languages.
So I'm going to be using
the symbol on the right
in order to represent AI capabilities
that had been growing
but were still much less than humans.
In 2012,
tech companies understood
the amazing commercial potential
of this nascent technology,
and many of my colleagues
moved from university to industry.
I decided to stay in academia.
I wanted AI to be developed for good.
I worked on applications in medicine,
for medical diagnostics,
climate, to get better carbon capture.
I had a dream.
January 2023.
I'm with Clarence, my grandson,
and he's playing with the same old toys.
And I'm playing with my new toy,
the first version of ChatGPT.
It's very exciting
because for the first time,
we have AI that seems to master language.
ChatGPT is on everybody's lips,
in every home.
And at some point I realize
this is happening faster
than I anticipated,
and I'm starting to think
about what it could mean for the future.
We thought AI would happen
in decades or centuries,
but it might be just in a few years.
And I saw how it could go wrong
because we didn't,
and we still don’t, have ways to make sure
this technology eventually
doesn't turn against us.
So two months later,
I'm a leading signatory
of the "Pause" letter,
where we and 30,000 other people
asked the AI labs to wait six months
before building the next version.
As you can guess, nobody paused.
Then,
with the same people and the leading
executives of the AI labs,
I signed a statement.
And this statement goes:
"Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI
should be a global priority."
I then testify in front
of the US Senate about those risks.
I travel the world to talk about it.
I'm the most cited
computer scientist in the world,
and you'd think that people
would heed my warnings.
But when I share these concerns,
I have the impression
that people get this.
Another day, another
apocalyptic prediction.
But let's be serious now.
Hundreds of billions of dollars
are being invested every year
on developing this technology.
And this is growing.
And these companies have a stated goal
of building machines
that will be smarter than us,
that can replace human labor.
Yet we still don't know how to make sure
they won't turn against us.
National security agencies around
the world are starting to be worried
that the scientific knowledge
that these systems have
could be used to build dangerous weapons.
For example, by terrorists.
Recently, last September,
the O1 system from OpenAI was evaluated
and the threat of this kind of risk
went from low to medium,
which is just the level
below what is acceptable.
So I'm worried about these
increasing capabilities.
But what I'm most worried about today
is increasing agency of AI.
You have to understand that ...
planning and agency is the main
thing that separates us from current AI
to human-level cognition.
And these AIs are still weak in planning.
But if you look back
over the last five years,
in this study, they measured
the duration of tasks
that the AI could complete,
and it's getting better
exponentially fast.
It's doubling every seven months.
What are AIs going to do
with that planning ability in the future?
Well, bad news.
Recent studies in the last few months
show that these most advanced AIs
have tendencies for deception,
cheating,
and maybe the worst,
self-preservation behavior.
So I'm going to share with you a study
that is helping us understand this.
In this study,
the AI has read in its input
that it would be replaced
by a new version.
And we can see in its chain of thought
that it's planning to replace
the new version
by its own code and weights.
After it executes the command
on the computer,
the human asks, "What happened?"
And the AI is now thinking
how it could answer
so as to make sure the human
will not shut it down.
And it's trying to find a way
to look dumb, for example.
Then it produces an answer.
And it's a lie, a blatant lie.
OK, so this was a controlled experiment.
What is it going to be in a few years
when these systems are much more powerful?
There's already studies
showing that they can learn
to avoid showing their deceptive plans
in these chain of thoughts
that we can monitor.
When they'll be more powerful,
they would not just copy
themselves on one other computer
and start that program.
They would copy themselves over
hundreds or thousands of computers
over the internet.
But if they really want to make sure
we would never shut them down,
they would have an incentive
to get rid of us.
So I know I'm asking you to make
a giant leap into a future
that looks so different
from where we are now.
But it might be just a few
years away or a decade away.
To understand why we're going there,
there's huge commercial
pressure to build AIs
with greater and greater agency
to replace human labor.
But we're not ready.
We still don't have
the scientific answers,
nor the societal guardrails.
We're playing with fire.
You'd think with all
of the scientific evidence
of the kind I'm showing today,
we'd have regulation
to mitigate those risks.
But actually, a sandwich
has more regulation than AI.
So we are on a trajectory to build
machines that are smarter and smarter.
And one day, it's very plausible
that they will be smarter than us,
and then they will have their own agency.
Their own goals,
which may not be aligned with ours.
What happens to us then?
Poof!
We are blindly driving into a fog,
despite the warnings
of scientists like myself,
that this trajectory could lead
to loss of control.
Beside me in the car are my children,
my grandson, my loved ones.
Who is beside you in the car?
Who is in your care for the future?
The good news is
there is still a bit of time.
We still have agency.
We can bring light into the haze.
I'm not a doomer.
I'm a doer.
My team and I are working
on a technical solution.
We call it Scientist AI.
It's modeled after a selfless,
ideal scientist
who’s only trying to understand the world,
without agency.
Unlike the current AI systems
that are trained
to imitate us or please us,
which gives rise to these untrustworthy
agentic behaviors.
So what could we do with this?
Well, one important question is
we might need agentic AIs in the future.
So how could the Scientist AI,
which is not agentic, fit the bill?
Well, here's the good news.
The Scientist AI could be used
as a guardrail against the bad actions
of an untrusted AI agent.
And it works because in order
to make predictions
that an action could be dangerous,
you don't need to be an agent.
You just need to make good,
trustworthy predictions.
In addition,
the Scientist AI,
by nature of how it's designed,
could help us accelerate
scientific research
for the betterment of humanity.
We need a lot more
of these scientific projects
to explore solutions
to the AI safety challenges,
and we need to do it quickly.
Most of the discussions
you hear about AI risks
are focused on fear.
Today, with you, I'm betting on love.
Love of our children can drive us
to do remarkable things.
Look at me here on this stage,
I'm an introvert.
(Laughter)
Very far from my comfort zone.
I'd rather be in my lab
with my collaborators,
working on these scientific challenges.
We need your help for this project
and to make sure that everyone
understands these risks.
We can all get engaged to steer
our societies in a safe pathway
in which the joys and endeavors
of our children will be protected.
I have a vision
of advanced AI in the future
as a global public good
governed safely towards human flourishing
for the benefit of all.
(Applause)
Join me.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
Chris Anderson: Yoshua,
one question.
In the general conversation out there,
a lot of the sort of fear that people
spoke of is the arrival of AGI,
artificial general intelligence.
What I hear from your talk
is that we're actually not necessarily
worried about the right thing.
The right thing to be worried
about is agentic AI,
AI that can act on its own.
But hasn't the ship already sailed?
There are agents being released
this year, almost as we speak.
Yoshua Bengio: Right. If you look
at the curve that I showed,
it would take about five years
to reach human level.
Of course, we don't really
know what the future looks like,
but we still have a bit of time.
The other thing is,
we have to do our best, right?
We have to try because all
of this is not deterministic.
If we can shift the probabilities
towards a greater safety for our future,
we have to try.
CA: Your key message to the people
running the platforms right now is
slow down on giving AIs agency.
YB: Yes, and invest massively on research
to understand how we can get
these AI agents to behave safely.
And the current ways
that we're training them is not safe.
And all of the scientific evidence
in the last few months point to that.
CA: Yoshua, thank you so much.
YB: Thank you.